---
layout: post
category: Python
date: '2018-07-29 12:05'
modified: '2018-07-29 12:05'
tags: 'practice, agile, engineering'
title: Tea Leaf Reading
---

The longer I am concerned with stats and machine-learning,
the more wary I get of what I like to call tea leaf reading,
i.e. substantiating arguments with numbers. The problem
about this is mostly, that the evidence is kind of arbitray.
Without too much effort, someone could come up with a
counterargument substantiated by some other numbers found in
the same context. Truth is, most systems are really complex,
and quite often, it would take substantial efforts to
produce numerical evidence for or against an argument, that
would hold up to statistical scrutiny. And even professions,
that were well aware of basic stats, such as sociology and
psychology, have recently learned how challenging empirical
evidence can be.

So, when I read the Scrum Guide, which emphasizes several
times how empirical the method is, the alarm bells are
starting to chime. I know, some Scrum consultant will use
this, to advice people to track their velocities and base
decisions based upon it. Yet many changes of velocity might
just well be within the range of usual fluctuation of that
quantity. Scrum teams evaluating whether an action they
undertook is effective or not based on their velocity, are
reading tea leaves. Roughly speaking I belief that you can
use a “velocity” measurement (I would prefer throughput as a
metric) as a guide for estimating when a backlog item might
be implemented, plus minus an error margin. I also belief
that the quantity by itself is so volatile and depends on
many parameters PLUS is highly stochastic (meaning, even if
the circumstances and parameters do not change, by
coincidence, the team would take more or less time to
complete comparable work items), that it isn’t of much use
for much.

Much more useful in my opinion is in many cases a
conceptual, deductive argument, and yes, personal experience
and narrative – that is unless I am very sure, that a sound
empirical reasoning can be made.
